

--- page 1 ---

Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79:430
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjc/s10052-019-6932-z
Regular Article - Experimental Physics
muCool: a next step towards efﬁcient muon beam compression
I. Belosevic1,a, A. Antognini1,2,Y .B a o2,5, A. Eggenberger1, M. Hildebrandt2,R .I w a i1, D. M. Kaplan 3,
K. S. Khaw1,6,K .K i r c h1,2, A. Knecht2,A .P a p a2,4, C. Petitjean2, T. J. Phillips3,F .M .P i e g s a1,7, N. Ritjoho2,
A. Stoykov2, D. Taqqu1, G. Wichmann1
1 Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics, ETH Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland
2 Paul Scherrer Institute, 5232 Villigen-PSI, Switzerland
3 Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL 60616, USA
4 Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Pisa, and INFN sez. Pisa, Largo B. Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy
5 Present address: Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
6 Present address: Department of Physics, University of Washington, Seattle, W A 98195, USA
7 Present address:Laboratory for High Energy Physics, Albert Einstein Center for Fundamental Physics, University of Bern, 3012 Bern, Switzerland
Received: 20 November 2018 / Accepted: 9 May 2019 / Published online: 21 May 2019
© The Author(s) 2019
Abstract A novel device to compress the phase space of a
muon beam by a factor of 1010 w i t ha1 0−3 efﬁciency is under
development. A surface muon beam is stopped in a helium
gas target consisting of several compression stages, wherein
strong electric and magnetic ﬁelds are applied. The spatial
extent of the stopped muon swarm is decreased by means of
these ﬁelds until muons with eV energy are extracted into vac-
uum through a small oriﬁce. It was observed that a 20 cm long
muon stop distribution can be compressed in the longitudinal
direction to a sub-mm extent within 2µs. Additionally, a drift
perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld of the compressed low-
energy muon swarm was successfully demonstrated, paving
the way towards extraction from the gas and re-acceleration
of the muons.
1 Introduction
Standard surface muon beams have a relatively poor phase
space quality. An improvement of the muon beam quality
would open the way for new experiments in low energy par-
ticle physics, atomic physics and material research. Exam-
ples of such experiments include muonium 1S-2S spec-
troscopy, muon electric dipole moment (EDM) measure-
ment and muon spin rotation (μSR) applications. Due to the
limited lifetime of the muons ( τ = 2197 ns), a fast cool-
ing scheme is required, and thus conventional beam cooling
methods such as stochastic [1] or electron cooling [2] cannot
be applied. Several alternative muon beam cooling schemes
have been developed: based on frictional cooling [3], ioniza-
a e-mail: ivanabe@phys.ethz.ch
tion cooling (MICE) [4] or moderation in solid rare gas layers
[5]. The common principle of the phase space compression
obtained using these techniques is momentum spread reduc-
tion in all directions by moderation in matter and subsequent
re-acceleration in the longitudinal direction.
In contrast, the scheme presented here (muCool device
[6]) moderates the muon beam momentum while simultane-
ously compressing its beam spot. Such a phase space com-
pression is achieved by stopping the incomingμ
+ in He gas,
while manipulating them in the gas with electric and mag-
netic ﬁelds in order to decrease their spatial extent. After
compression, which takes place within 10µs, the muons are
extracted at eV energies from the He gas and re-accelerated.
When this technique is applied to a standard surface μ
+
beam, the 6D phase space is reduced by a factor of 10 10
with an efﬁciency of 10−3, mainly limited by the muon life-
time. Thus, the brightness of the incoming beam is enhanced
by a factor of 10
7.
The decrease of the muon swarm extent is obtained by
making the drift velocity of the μ+ in the gas position-
dependent. The drift velocity vector of μ+ in gas, in the
presence of electric and magnetic ﬁelds, can be written as
[7]:
vD = μ|E|
1 + ω2/ν2
[
ˆE + ω
ν
ˆE × ˆB + ω2
ν2
(
ˆE · ˆB
)
ˆB
]
, (1)
where μ = e/νm is the mobility of the muon,ˆE and ˆB are the
unit vectors of the electric and magnetic ﬁelds, ω = eB/m
is the cyclotron frequency of the muon and ν the average
collision frequency of the muon with the He gas atoms. The
drift velocity vD can be made position-dependent by apply-
ing a position-dependent electric ﬁeld E and/or by making
123

--- page 2 ---

430 Page 2 of 9 Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430
Fig. 1 Overview of the proposed phase space compression scheme.
A standard surface muon beam, propagating along the − z-direction, is
stopped in cryogenic helium gas with a vertical temperature gradient
inside a 5 T magnetic ﬁeld. The stopped muon swarm is then compressed
by means of E-a n d B-ﬁelds in the y-direction (“transverse compres-
sion”), and at the same time it is steered in the x-direction towards the
longitudinal compression stage. There, the He gas is at room tempera-
ture, and there is a component of the electric ﬁeld parallel to the magnetic
ﬁeld axis. Thus, the muon swarm is compressed towards the center of
this stage. Finally, the muons with a swarm size of
O(mm) are extracted
through a small oriﬁce into vacuum, where they are re-accelerated and
sent to the next experiment
the collision frequencyνposition-dependent, which changes
the weights of the three components in Eq. 1.
A sketch of the He gas target where such a compression
occurs is shown in Fig. 1, together with the coordinate sys-
tem used throughout this paper. The target consists of sev-
eral stages and is placed in a homogeneous magnetic ﬁeld,
oriented along the +z-direction, i.e. B = (0, 0, B), with
B = 5T e s l a .
The incoming μ
+ beam, propagating along the − z direc-
tion, is stopped in the ﬁrst stage which is at cryogenic tem-
peratures, with a vertical ( y-direction) gas density gradient
induced by a temperature gradient between T = 4Ka tt h e
bottom and T = 12 K at the top of the roughly 3 cm high
target [8]. The gas density gradient gives rise to a position-
dependent collision frequency ν= ν(x, y, z).
An electric ﬁeld E = (Ex, Ey, 0) with Ex = Ey ≈
1k V c m−1 is applied perpendicular to the magnetic ﬁeld
in this stage, thus only the ﬁrst two terms in Eq. 1 remain.
The muons in a region of higher gas density (colder tem-
peratures) follow the ˆE-direction becauseνis large, whereas
muons in a region of lower gas density (warmer tempera-
tures) primarily follow the ˆE × ˆB-direction. With our choice
of E, B and ν(x, y, z) we achieve compression of the stopped
muon swarm in the vertical (y) direction (called “transverse
compression”), with superimposed drift in the +x-direction
towards the second compression stage, where longitudinal
(in the z-direction) compression occurs.
The second stage is at room temperature (much lower gas
density) and the electric ﬁeld is parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld:
E = (0, 0,∓ E
z) pointing towards the center of the target,
as indicated in Fig. 1, with Ez ≈ 50 V cm−1. Therefore, in
the second stage Eq. 1 simpliﬁes to vD ≈ μE, and the muon
swarm is compressed along the ±z-direction (“longitudinal
compression”) towards z = 0. Adding an electric ﬁeld in
the y-direction gives rise to a superimposed drift in the +x-
direction, which guides the compressed muon swarm towards
an oriﬁce of about 1 mm diameter, through which the muons
are extracted into vacuum. After extraction into the vacuum,
the μ
+ are accelerated to keV energy, while maintaining eV
energy spread, and are subsequently extracted from the mag-
netic ﬁeld.
Initially, the various stages of the compression target can
be tested separately, simplifying the experimental approach
considerably. Transverse compression has been successfully
demonstrated and will be presented in a separate publication.
Longitudinal compression has been demonstrated to be feasi-
ble [9]. However, several problems prevented quantiﬁcation
of the muon swarm compression efﬁciency. The major issue
was impurities in the helium gas target, which captured low-
energy muons and thus lowered the compression efﬁciency.
Moreover, a large background allowed us to demonstrate only
qualitatively the feasibility of the longitudinal compression.
In this paper we present an improved demonstration of the
longitudinal compression with a quantiﬁcation of the com-
pression efﬁciency. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
muon swarm can be steered in the +x-direction by adding a
vertical (y-direction) electric ﬁeld. This is crucial to guiding
the μ
+ through the various compression stages and ﬁnally
towards the point of extraction. The experiments were per-
formed at the πE1 beam line at the Paul Scherrer Institute
(PSI), which delivers about 104 μ+/s at 11 MeV/c.
2 Test of longitudinal compression
In order to test longitudinal compression, an 11 MeV/c muon
beam was injected longitudinally into a target containing He
gas of a few mbar pressure at room temperature. The setup
is sketched in Fig. 2. The muons ﬁrst have to pass through
a5 5 µm thick entrance detector (D1), giving the initial time
t
0 = 0, then through a 2 µm Mylar target window enclosing
t h eH eg a s .O n l yas m a l lf r a c t i o nO(1%) of the muons pro-
ducing the signal in D1 stop in the gas, while the remaining
muons stop in D1 or the target window (region I in Fig.2)o r
the downstream part of the target (region II in Fig. 2).
The longitudinal compression target had a transverse cross
section of 12×12 mm2, and an “active” length, within which
the electric ﬁeld was deﬁned, of about 200 mm. The side walls
of the target were lined with gold electrodes that created a
V-shaped electric potential with a minimum at the center of
the target cell at z = 0. This choice of the electric potential
produced an electric ﬁeld pointing towards z = 0, which
123

--- page 3 ---

Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430 Page 3 of 9 430
Fig. 2 Sketch of the He gas target used to measure the longitudinal
compression (not to scale). The muon beam passes through an entrance
detector D1, target window (region I) and enters the He gas (indicated
in pink). Some of the muons are stopped in the gas and subjected to the
electric ﬁeld, pointing towards the center of the target. A large fraction
of the muons pass through the target and stop in region II. Several
scintillators (S1, ... , S21, T1, T2) detect the positrons from muons
decaying in their vicinity
caused the muons to move along the ±z-direction towards
the potential minimum.1
The exact electric ﬁeld was simulated using a ﬁnite-
element method within COMSOL Multiphysics® [ 10] and
imported into the Geant4 simulation package [11], allowing
us to study muon motion in the realistic electric ﬁeld. The
Geant4 simulation included the most relevant low-energy
processes down to eV energies, namely low-energy elastic
collisions (μ
+−He and muonium−He) and charge exchange
processes (muonium formation and ionization) [ 9]. Cross
sections for elastic collisions and charge exchange were
implemented by energy and velocity scaling [ 12], respec-
tively, of the proton cross sections from [13,14].
A simulation of the muon distribution inside the target at
two different times t is shown in Fig. 3. The distribution at
t = 0.15 µs represents the initial muon stop distribution,
while the distribution at t = 2 µs shows the muon distribu-
tion when the longitudinal compression is almost completed.
To highlight the muon swarm compression, the number of
counts has been scaled with exp(t/τ), where τ= 2197 ns is
the muon lifetime, in order to compensate for muon decay.
Under such conditions and neglecting muon decay, att =
2 µs, 63% of the muons that were in the active region at
t = 0.15 µs are still within the active region, with 90%
of those already within z =± 5 mm. Moreover, 50% of all
muons in the active region att = 2 µs are already compressed
in the center within an even smaller region of z =± 1 mm.
Therefore, the fraction of muons within the region of z =
±1 mm increases by about a factor of 20 between 0 .15 µs
and 2 µs.
The other 37% of the muons that were initially in the active
region are lost through two main mechanisms: 26% through
muonium formation and 11% through scattering out of the
1 Because of∇· E = 0, at z = 0 the electric ﬁeld will also have a radial
component. This component is included automatically in the COMSOL
Multiphysics® simulation but it is so small that it does not signiﬁcantly
affect the muon motion.
Fig. 3 Simulated muon distribution along thez-axis for various times.
The histograms have been corrected for the ﬁnite muon lifetime by
multiplying the counts with e
t/2197 ns . As can be seen, for t = 2 µs
most of the muons are close to the center of the active region. The
shaded areas show the fraction of the μ
+ that stopped in the walls of
the target. At t = 2 µs, the distribution of theμ+ adhering to the target
walls is not ﬂat anymore. The reason for the peak around z = 0i st h a t
some of the μ+ are scattered into the wall while drifting towards the
center of the target
active region due to low-energy elastic collisions. A muon
bound in the neutral muonium atom is not conﬁned by the
5 tesla magnetic ﬁeld, causing it to ﬂy into the walls of the
target. The losses due to scattering of μ
+ are relevant only
when the muon beam is injected into the longitudinal tar-
get at keV energies, because the μ+ mean free path at these
energies can be up to a few cm. These losses will therefore
be absent in the ﬁnal setup, in which muons enter the longi-
tudinal compression stage from the transverse compression
stage at eV energies. Indeed, at such energies, the μ
+ mean
free path is sub-mm. Similarly, the losses due to muonium
formation will be strongly reduced in the ﬁnal setup.
The muon swarm movement was measured experimen-
tally by placing 21 identical plastic (BC-404) scintillators
(S1 to S21) along the target z-axis, as shown in Fig. 2.T h e
scintillators had dimensions of 30 × 5 × 6m m3 and were
wrapped in Teﬂon™ tape. When positrons from muon decays
pass through the scintillators they produce scintillation light
which is then read out by Silicon Photomultipliers (SiPMs)
with 3× 3m m
3 active area. The acceptance of some of these
scintillators as a function of muon decayz-position is plotted
in Fig. 4. Each detector has an average geometrical accep-
tance in the z-direction of 16.5m m( F W H M ) .
The number of measured positrons in each scintillator is
presented for t = 150 ns (black dots) andt = 2000 ns (green
dots) in Fig.5. Note that the number of counts has been scaled
with et/2197 ns to compensate for muon decay.
In Fig. 5 the measured μ+ distributions (dots) are com-
pared to the Geant4 simulations (curves). The simulated
number of positron hits in each of the detectors S1-S21
123

--- page 4 ---

430 Page 4 of 9 Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430
Fig. 4 Simulated geometrical acceptance of scintillators S1-S21 (only
every second detector is shown) versusz-position. Shown is the normal-
ized probability that a positron from aμ+ decay will be detected in the
corresponding scintillator. For comparison, the geometrical acceptance
of the T1 & T2 coincidence is also plotted (red line). The maximum
of the efﬁciency for each detector was normalized to 1 to highlight the
different geometrical resolutions
Fig. 5 Measured (dots) and simulated (curves) positron hits in the 21
scintillators shown in Fig. 2,f o r t = 150 ns and t = 2000 ns. The
center-to-center distance between two adjacent scintillators is 10 mm.
The simulated data are the same as in Fig. 3, but convoluted with the
geometrical acceptance of the detectors. The width of the peak at t =
2 µs is due to the large geometrical acceptance of the 21 scintillators
and does not reﬂect the width of the muon swarm directly (compare
with Fig. 3). The shaded areas show the simulated contributions to the
positron hits from muons stopped in regions I and II. The data and
the simulations have been corrected for the ﬁnite muon lifetime by
multiplying the counts by e
t/2197 ns
is obtained by convoluting the simulated spatial distribu-
tion of the muon swarm at the corresponding time, given in
Fig. 3, with the detection efﬁciency of the appropriate detec-
tor, given in Fig. 4. These positron hits originate not only
from the muons in the active region, but also from muons
from the regions where the electric ﬁeld is not well deﬁned,
giving rise to a substantial background.
This background is dominated by positron hits from μ
+
that stop in the regions I and II (as deﬁned in Fig. 2). The
background is larger for the detectors placed at the periphery
of the active region (S1, S2 and S20, S21), as shown in Fig.5
(shaded areas). The shape of the background caused by these
muons can be simulated. However, the exact number of μ+
which stop in the regions I and II depends strongly on the
momentum distribution of the initial muon beam, which is
not sufﬁciently well known.
Therefore, two measured distributions along the z-axis
(for t = 150 ns and t = 2000 ns) are ﬁtted simultaneously
with the sum of 4 contributions:
1. Background arising from the region I.
2. Background arising from the region II.
3. Linear (in time) background.
4. Simulation of all μ
+ that stop in the gas (which includes
μ+ in the active region).
The shapes of these 4 contributions are known, under the
assumption that all the detectors (S1 to S21) have the same
detection efﬁciency. Each of the contributions has to be scaled
with a different scaling factor to account for the different
stopping probabilities in region I, region II, the gas, and
prompt stops at the target lateral walls. The additional linear
background allows us to account for possible misalignment
between the target and the magnetic ﬁeld axis, which would
lead to different numbers of muon wall stops at the positions
of the various scintillators.
Even though we observe fair agreement between the mea-
surement and the simulation (reduced chi-square
2 χ2
red =
2.3, for 37 degrees of freedom), it is difﬁcult to extract pre-
cise values of the compression efﬁciency and of the width of
the muon swarm from these measurements, given the lim-
ited geometrical resolution of the detectors S1 to S21 and the
large background from regions I and II. The relatively large
χ
2
red could be attributed to small variations of the detector
efﬁciencies.
In order to better quantify the compression efﬁciency we
turn our attention to the two telescope detectors T1 & T2
in coincidence that were placed below the target, at z = 0,
as shown in Fig. 2. These scintillators had dimensions of
32×3×3m m
3 and were also read out by 3×3m m2 SiPMs.
Massive brass shielding all around the target ensured that
2 In this paper we are using following deﬁnition of the reduced chi-
square:
χ2
red = 1
ndf
N∑
i=1
(ndata,i − nsim,i )2
σ2
data,i
, (2)
where N is the number of bins in the histogram, ndata,i and nsim,i are
the numbers of counts in the i-th bin of the data and simulation his-
tograms, respectively, σdata,i is the statistical uncertainty of ndata,i and
ndf is the number of degrees of freedom (equal to N - the number of
ﬁtted parameters). The statistical uncertainty of the simulated points is
signiﬁcantly smaller than σ
data,i , and can therefore be neglected.
123

--- page 5 ---

Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430 Page 5 of 9 430
Fig. 6 Measured (dots) and simulated (curves) time spectra for 5 mbar
He gas pressure and potentials of−500 V (red), 0 V (black) and+500 V
(green). The data have been normalized to the number of incoming
muons in the entrance detector D1 and ﬁtted simultaneously with only
2 free parameters, a common normalization and a common background.
In total 5·10
8 muons have been simulated. The data and the simulations
have been corrected for the ﬁnite muon lifetime by multiplying the
counts by e
t/2197 ns
coincidence hits in T1 & T2 originated only from muons
decaying within the small region between aboutz =± 3m m
in the center of the target, as shown in Fig. 4. From the time
difference t = t1 − t0 between the positron hits in T1 and
T2 in coincidence (at time t1) and the entrance detector, at
time t0, a time spectrum can be obtained as shown in Fig. 6.
The time spectra were recorded for different applied electric
potentials.
It can be seen in Fig. 6 that if no electric ﬁeld is applied
(black points) the number of muons decaying in the center of
the target (in the T1 & T2 acceptance region) stays constant
(after compensation for μ
+ decay). When a negative poten-
tial (red points) is applied in the center of the target cell,
the measured number of counts increases with time. In that
case, the stopped muons are attracted towards the potential
minimum, so that more muons decay within the acceptance
region of T1 & T2. This means that the muon swarm extent
has been decreased in the z-direction, representing a com-
plementary way to demonstrate longitudinal compression.
On the contrary, if the “wrong” polarity is applied (green
points), the muons drift away from the center of the target,
out of the acceptance region of T1 & T2. The very few counts
at late times in that case are due to some small background
(mostly muons stopping in the wall of the target). The reduc-
tion to a nearly background-free measurement represents a
major improvement compared with the earlier measurements
from 2011 [9] and compared to the measurement of the μ
+
z-distribution of Fig. 5.
The measurements of Fig.6 are compared to Geant4 simu-
lations. The three simulations (+, − and 0 voltage) are ﬁtted
simultaneously to the corresponding measured time spec-
tra. Only two free parameters were used: a common scaling
factor and a common ﬂat background. The common scaling
factor is needed to remove the uncertainties related to the
positron detection and muon stopping efﬁciencies. The ﬂat
background was included in the ﬁt to account for potential
misalignment of the target with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld
axis, which would lead to increased muon stops in the walls.
The simultaneous ﬁt of the 3 curves has a reduced chi-
square χ
2
red = 1.41 (for 46 degrees of freedom). Introduc-
tion of additional losses during the compression process, as
detailed in the next section, improves the χ2
red value to 0.95.
Alternatively, a smallerχ2
red can also be obtained by a minor
tuning of the detector acceptance, related to uncertainties in
the position, tilt and energy threshold of the T1 & T2 scin-
tillators.
3 Additional muon losses?
As mentioned in the introduction, in the previous (2011)
experiment [9], the data displayed lower-than-expected com-
pression efﬁciency, which was visible from the premature
termination (at around t = 0.5 µs) of the compression in the
measured time spectra. This was attributed to severe losses of
“free” muons, hypothesized to have been caused by impuri-
ties present in the helium gas (from outgassing of the Araldite
glue and PCB boards used in the target construction). The
presence of such impurities would cause the capture of low-
energy muons by the contaminant molecules. Additionally,
other issues affected the previous measurements such as mis-
alignment between target and magnetic ﬁeld axis, small tar-
get size and poor spatial resolution of the positron detector.
These issues suppress the rise in the time spectra, thereby
imitating the signature of the “free” muon losses, making it
difﬁcult to quantify the actual compression efﬁciency.
In the experiments presented here, care was taken to
improve the aspects limiting the previous experiment: the
detector resolution was enhanced by introducing more
shielding around the positron detectors and using the tele-
scope detectors (T1 & T2) in coincidence instead of a sin-
gle detector, the target size was increased and the electric
ﬁeld strength and homogeneity were improved. As a con-
sequence, the sensitivity to target misalignment was consid-
erably reduced. Additionally, high gas purity was ensured
by constructing the target from glass plates, using a low-
outgassing glue and purifying the He gas in a cold-trap before
feeding it into the target.
In order to prove the hypothesis that indeed the compres-
sion efﬁciency is lowered if contaminants are present in the
gas, we introduced in a controlled way various amounts of
123

--- page 6 ---

430 Page 6 of 9 Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430
Fig. 7 Measured time spectra for 5 mbar pure He gas, and vari-
ous admixtures of contaminants: (black) no additional contaminants,
(dashed blue) 0.01 mbar H
2, (dashed orange) 0.02 mbar H 2,( d a s h e d
green) 0.01 mbar of O 2. All data were normalized to the number of
incoming muons and corrected for the ﬁnite muon lifetime by multi-
plying the counts bt e
t/2197 ns
contaminant gases into the pure helium gas. The results of this
test are presented in the time spectra of Fig.7. It is observed
that the compression stops at earlier times when contaminants
are introduced, and consequently the compression efﬁciency
decreases (i.e., the number of muons that are brought to the
center of target).
The sensitivity of the measurements of Fig.6 to the muon
loss mechanisms has been investigated assuming constant (in
time) effective loss rates R during compression, that cause
the “free” muon population to decrease according to e
− Rt .
Various simulations have been performed with R ranging
from R = 0u pt o R = 0.5 µs−1. The time spectrum with an
effective loss rate R = 0.5 µs−1 would correspond roughly
to the measured time spectrum with 0.01 mbar H2 contami-
nation (blue dashed line in Fig. 7).
The simultaneous ﬁt of the simulations for +, − and 0
voltages to the corresponding measurements has been per-
formed for each effective loss rate R (as in Fig. 6,b u tf o r
R ̸= 0). Figure 8 (top) shows the ﬁtted time spectra (only
for negative voltage) for several effective loss rates R.F o r
each of the effective loss rates R,t h eχ2
red between the mea-
surement (only −500 V data) and simulations has been cal-
culated and plotted in Fig. 8 (bottom). A parabola was then
ﬁtted to these points (green line). The best agreement (mini-
mum χ2
red) between simulation and measurement is obtained
for R = 0.14 µs−1, corresponding to an additional effec-
tive loss at t = 2 µso f1 − e−0.14 µs−1·2 µs = 24%. The
χ2
red,min + 1 is obtained for R = 0.35 µs−1 corresponding
to an additional loss at t = 2 µs of 51%. Therefore, we con-
clude that the total additional “free” muon loss after 2 µsi s
24+27
−24%.
Had these losses been caused by capture of the muons by
gas impurities, the partial pressure of the impurities would
Fig. 8 (Top) Simulated time spectra for effective loss rates of R =
(0, 0.125, 0.25, 0.333) µs−1 (curves). The −500 V measurement is
represented by square points. The data and the simulations have been
corrected for the ﬁnite muon lifetime by multiplying the counts by
e
t/2197 ns . (Middle) Residuals for the time spectra from the top ﬁgure.
For simplicity, error bars are shown only for the curve with reduced
χ
2 = 0.95. For other curves error bars are of similar size. (Bottom)
Reduced χ2 as a function of the effective loss rate R. A second-order
polynomial was ﬁtted to these points (green line)
have been ∼ 10−3 mbar.3 However, the purity of the He gas
in the target was analyzed with a mass spectrometer and such
impurity levels have not been observed. Thus, it is reason-
able to conclude that the origin of these “effective losses” R
cannot be attributed solely to the impurities.
3 The relation between ﬁtted R and impurity concentration is obtained
by ﬁtting the simulation for various loss rates R to the measured time
spectra of Fig. 7 with the additional 0.01 mbar H2 contamination.
123

--- page 7 ---

Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430 Page 7 of 9 430
Other explanations, such as small deviations of the detec-
tor acceptance (spatial resolution) and of the cross sections
from the values implemented in the simulations, are more
favored. For example, a shift of only 0.5 mm (which is within
the tolerance of the mechanics) of the T1 y-position from
the design position would decrease the acceptance of T1 &
T2 in coincidence by 5%. This would then translate to a 5%
decrease of the number of counts at late times in the measured
time spectra of Fig. 8 (top), thereby imitating the signature
of the “free” muon loss. This 5% decrease in the number
of counts at late times roughly corresponds to the decrease
caused by an effective loss rate R = 0.125 µs
−1 (compare
red and black lines of Fig. 8 (top)).
4E × B-Drift
The next important step towards the realization of the com-
plete muCool device is the demonstration of the so-called
E × B drift. This drift guides the muons from one compres-
sion stage to the next, and is also used to extract them ﬁnally
into vacuum through a small oriﬁce.
For this purpose we modiﬁed the target cell to gener-
ate an electric ﬁeld with an additional vertical component
E
y = 120 V/cm. The non-vanishing central term in Eq. 1
leads to a drift of the muons in the +x-direction. The target
cell was enlarged to a transverse cross section of 24×12 mm2
and, additionally, the muon beam was injected off-center, as
indicated in Fig. 9 by the yellow circle. These two modiﬁca-
tions allowed μ+ to drift for longer times before hitting the
right wall of the target, thus enhancing the sensitivity of the
measured time spectra to the muon drift.
In total seven plastic scintillators were mounted around
the target at z = 0 along the x-direction to monitor this
drift, as shown in the sketch of Fig. 9. For simplicity, we
present only the time spectra from three of them, namely
“Left”, “Middle”, “Right”, given their favorable detection
efﬁciency and sensitivity to the muon motion. As before, the
scintillators were read out by 3 × 3m m
2 SiPMs.
The simulated spatial distribution of the muon swarm as
a function of time is given in Fig. 10. This distribution, con-
voluted with the corresponding detector acceptances, gives
rise to the simulated time spectra shown in Fig. 11, together
with the corresponding measurements.
At early times, the time spectra are dominated by the
muon swarm compression in the z-direction, thus the num-
ber of detected positrons increases in all scintillators. How-
ever, after about 2 µs, the number of detected positrons in
the “Left” scintillator decreases, indicating that the muons
are moving out of the acceptance region of this scintillator.
On the other hand, “Right” scintillator detects increasingly
more positrons. This ﬁnding indicates that the muon swarm
Fig. 9 Sketch of the setup to measure theE× B drift. The muon beam
was injected off-axis to allow the muons to drift a longer distance before
hitting the lateral wall. The electric ﬁeld has az-component for longitu-
dinal compression and a y-component to drift the muons inx-direction.
Seven plastic scintillators are positioned above the target at z = 0, but
at different x-coordinates, to monitor the muon swarm movement in
the x-direction. The scintillators had a cross section of 2 × 2m m
2 and
length (in the y-direction) of 32.5 mm for the three central scintillators
and 48.5 mm for the four scintillators on the left and right sides of the
target
Fig. 10 Muon positions in the xz -plane for various times. The time
is given by the color scale. Muon beam centered at x =− 6m mw i t h
3 mm radius is stopped uniformly along the z-axis. The muons drift in
the +x-direction while compression occurs in z-direction
slowly drifts in the x-direction towards the prospective point
of extraction.
Also in this case, the measured time spectra of all seven
“drift” detectors were ﬁtted simultaneously with the simula-
tion allowing for one common scaling factor, and a different
ﬂat background for each detector. A fair agreement between
data and simulation has been observed (χ
2
red = 3.44 for 433
degrees of freedom), given that no systematic effects were
accounted for in the simulation.
123

--- page 8 ---

430 Page 8 of 9 Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430
Fig. 11 Measured (dots) time spectra for the three scintillators “Left”,
“Middle” and “Right”. The increase and decrease of positron counts in
the “Right” and “Left” detectors, respectively, indicates that the muons
are moving towards the right. Simulated time spectra for additional
muon loss rate R = 0 (continuous lines) and R = 0.125 µs
−1 (dashed
lines) are ﬁtted to the measured time spectra. The χ2
red for R = 0i s
3.44 for 433◦ degrees of freedom. Introducing the additional loss rate
R = 0.125 µs−1 improves the χ2
red to 2.23. Note that the data and
the simulations have been corrected for the ﬁnite muon lifetime by
multiplying the counts with e
t/2197 ns
To study the effect of additional muon losses on the
measured time spectra, an effective loss rate R has been
introduced in the simulation, analogously to the procedure
described in the previous section. The obtained time spec-
tra for the various R were then ﬁtted to the data. The best
agreement between simulation and the data is obtained for
R = 0.125 µs
−1, consistent with the loss rate R reported in
the previous section. The best ﬁt, which gives aχ2
red = 2.23,
is shown in Fig. 11 (dashed lines).
To extract the uncertainty of the hypothetical loss rate that
describes the data the best, we repeated the procedure of the
previous section: namely, ﬁtting with a parabola the plot of
the reduced chi-square versus loss rate (similar to Fig. 8).
Note that for that procedure, the error bars of the data were
scaled up by a factor of 2.23 to produce a minimum reduced
chi-square of 1. From this analysis we determined that the
loss rate that best describes the data is R = 0.17
+0.23
−0.17 µs−1
corresponding to a total ”free” muon loss at t = 2 µso f
28+26
−28%.
Even with the additional muon losses introduced, some
systematic discrepancies between the data and the simulation
still remain. Yet the main goal, namely to demonstrate the
feasibility of the E × B drift, has been achieved.
The difference between the simulation and the measure-
ment can be attributed either to the simpliﬁed modelling of
the additional losses (without any energy dependence) or a
misalignment of the beam with respect to the magnetic ﬁeld
axis.
According to the simulation, the drift velocity is about
2m m/µs. This value can be increased in the ﬁnal setup by
increasing the strength of the electric ﬁeld in they-direction.
5 Conclusions
The longitudinal compression stage of the muCool device
under development at PSI has been demonstrated. An elon-
gated muon swarm of 200 mm length has been compressed
to below 2 mm length within 2µs. Good agreement between
the simulation and the measurement has been observed.
Furthermore, the ability to drift the μ
+ beam in E × B-
direction towards the prospective position of the extraction
hole has been demonstrated by performing a measurement
with the electric ﬁeld having also a component perpendicular
to the magnetic ﬁeld.
In both cases, slightly better agreement between simula-
tions and measurements is achieved by including small addi-
tional effective losses in the simulation, that decrease the
actual compression efﬁciency by about 25% relative to (ideal)
simulations. These effective losses could be caused by gas
impurities. Alternatively, the small discrepancies between the
simulations and measurements could be attributed to a minor
(5%) overestimation of the detector acceptance or minor vari-
ation of the cross sections for muonium formation, muonium
ionization and muonium-He elastic scattering. In any case,
even with this additional effective loss, the proposedμ
+ com-
pression efﬁciency of 10−3 is attainable.
Acknowledgements The experimental work was performed at the pro-
ton accelerator at PSI. We thank the machine and beam line groups
for providing excellent conditions. We gratefully acknowledge the out-
standing support received from the workshops and support groups at
ETH Zurich and PSI. Furthermore, we thank F. Kottmann, M. Horis-
berger, U. Greuter, R. Scheuermann, T. Prokscha, D. Reggiani, K. Deit-
ers, T. Rauber, and F. Barchetti for their help. This work was supported
by the SNF Grants No. 200020_159754 and 200020_172639.
Data A vailability StatementThis manuscript has no associated data or
the data will not be deposited. [Authors’ comment: Raw or preprocessed
data and analysis software used can be provided by the corresponding
author upon request.]
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecomm
ons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit
to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative
Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.
Funded by SCOAP
3.
References
1. S. van der Meer, Rev. Mod. Phys. 57, 3 (1985)
2. G.I. Budker, A.N. Skrinskii, Sov. Phys. Usp. 21, 277 (1978)
3. M. Mühlbauer et al., Hyperﬁne Interact. 119, 1–4 (1999)
123

--- page 9 ---

Eur. Phys. J. C (2019) 79 :430 Page 9 of 9 430
4. T. A. Mohayai [MICE Collaboration]. arXiv:1806.01807
5. P. Bakule, E. Morenzoni, Contemp. Phys. 45, 3 (2004)
6. D. Taqqu, Phys. Rev. Lett. 97, 194801 (2006)
7. W. Blum, W. Riegler, L. Rolandi,Particle detection with drift cham-
bers, 2nd edn. (Springer, Berlin, 2008)
8. G. Wichmann et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 814, 33–38 (2016)
9. Y . Bao et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 112, 224801 (2014)
10. COMSOL Multiphysics®5.2. http://www.comsol.com.C O M S O L
AB, Stockholm, Sweden
11. S. Agostinelli et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 506, 3 (2003)
12. M. Senba, J. Phys. B 22, 12 (1989)
13. P.S. Krstic, D.R. Schultz, Phys. Plasmas 13, 5 (2006)
14. Y . Nakai et al., At. Data Nucl. Data Tables 37, 1 (1987)
123